Extra NonTuple Commas (#748)
ghc-proposals/ghc-proposals: proposals/0000-unordered_redundant_commas.rst

Extra commas in UnOrdered Structures
=========================================

.. author:: Viktor WW
.. date-accepted::
.. ticket-url::
.. implemented::
.. highlight:: haskell
.. header:: This proposal is `discussed at this pull request <https://github.com/ghc-proposals/ghc-proposals/pull/748>`_.
.. sectnum::
.. contents::

This proposal suggests extending the Haskell syntax to support trailing and leading commas 
in unordered structures (records, import and export lists and sublists, derivation and default clauses).

This change aims to improve code readability and maintainability by allowing more flexibility 
in formatting unordered structures (records, import and export lists and sublists, derivation and default clauses). 

> First of all, particularly important in scenarios involving version control, code reviews, and automated code generation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is particularly helpful in scenarios involving version control, code reviews, and automated code generation.
```

Motivation
----------

In many programming languages, including JavaScript, Python, and Rust, trailing commas in lists
(and other collection types) are a common feature.

> The problem code is repeated::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This causes the problem that code needs to be repeated::
```

    module Foo (
    #ifdef TESTING
    #ifdef USE_PATTERN_SYNONYMS
      Foo (Foo, Pat1, Pat2)
    #else
      Foo (Foo)
    #endif
    #elif USE_PATTERN_SYNONYMS
      Foo (Pat1, Pat2)
    #else
      Foo
    #endif

> Given trailing and leading commas, one could instead write::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If trailing and leading commas were allowed, one could instead write::
```

    module Foo (
      Foo(
    #ifdef TESTING
        , Foo
    #endif
    #if USE_PATTERN_SYNONYMS
        , Pat1
        , Pat2
    #endif
    )

This feature provides several benefits:

1. **Improved Diff Quality**: When adding or removing items in a structure, having a trailing or leading comma means only

>    the relevant lines are changed in version control systems, reducing the noise in diffs and making reviews easier.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   the relevant lines are changed, reducing the noise in diffs and making reviews easier.
```

  
2. **Ease of Code Modification**: Developers can add new elements to the end / beginnging of a structure without having 
   to modify the previous last / first line, which reduces the likelihood of syntax errors.

3. **Consistency in Formatting**: When generating code automatically or formatting structures in a specific way, 
   leading and trailing commas can simplify the process.

> 4. **Use a different style of coding**: Extra commas allow for different styles to write a code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. **Use a different style of coding**: Extra commas allow for different styles to write code.
```

5. **Simplicity of conditional meta-programming**: Extra commas allow to write much simpler code when conditional meta-programming is used.

History
~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Adding trailing commas (and more rarely leading commas) is a frequently asked feature to add in Haskell.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Adding trailing commas (and more rarely leading commas) is a frequently asked for feature to add to Haskell.
```

> But this task is highly divisive in the Haskell community.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But, this task is highly divisive in the Haskell community.
```

Original Proposal #87 
`ExtraCommas (was: Trailing and leading commas in sub-export lists) <https://github.com/ghc-proposals/ghc-proposals/pull/87>`__ 
was discussed several years and that discussion was so controversial,

> that author withdrawn own proposal just before the final Acceptation was received (with minor changes).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The original proposal #87 
`ExtraCommas (was: Trailing and leading commas in sub-export lists) <https://github.com/ghc-proposals/ghc-proposals/pull/87>`__ 
was discussed several years. The discussion was so controversial
that the author withdrew the proposal just before the final acceptance (with minor changes).
```

However, the tension in the Haskell community was so high that the duplicate of that proposal was never proposed 

> and had never succeeded in the next 6 years.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, the tension in the Haskell community was so high that a new attempt of that proposal has not been proposed in the following 6 years.
```

This proposal is an attempt to allow extra commas where everyone agrees to have them - 
in unordered structures (records, import and export "lists" and sublists, derivation and default clauses).

Proposed Change Specification
-----------------------------

> This proposal does not cover order-matter structures (including lists, tuples, constraint tuples).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This proposal does not cover structures in which order matters (including lists, tuples, constraint tuples).
```

This proposal introduces the following syntactical changes to Haskell:

1. **New extension**: Add language extension ``UnorderedExtraCommas`` with a simple rule where

>    extra commas are allowed: in unordered structures only.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **New extension**: Add a new language extension ``UnorderedExtraCommas`` which allows leading and trailing commas in unordered structures.
```

> 2. **Trailing Commas**: Allow a comma after the last element in place-unordered clauses:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. **Trailing Commas**: Allow a comma after the last element in enumeration clauses where order does not matter:
```

   - module export lists(already supported) and sub-lists
   - module import lists(already supported) and sub-lists
   - deriving and default clauses
   - record-like occurrences (declarations, patterns, constructions)

   ::
   
       module Foo
		  ( -- * Types
		    Foo,
		    Bar (C, D,),
			-- * Functions
		    mkFoo,
		  ) where 

       data Example a = ....
			deriving (
				Functor,
				Foldable,
				Applicative,
			)
				
       data family URec a p

       data instance URec (Ptr ()) p = UAddr   { uAddr#   :: Addr#,    }
       data instance URec Char     p = UChar   { uChar#   :: Char#,   uInt# :: Int#, }
       data instance URec Double   p = UDouble { uDouble# :: Double#, uInt# :: Int#, uFloat#  :: Float#, }

	  

> 3. **Leading Commas**: Allow a comma before the first element in place-unordered clauses:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. **Leading Commas**: Allow a comma before the first element in enumeration clauses where order does not matter:
```

   - module export lists and sub-lists
   - module import lists and sub-lists
   - deriving and default clauses
   - record-like occurrences (declarations, patterns, constructions)

   ::
   
       module Bar
		  ( -- * Types
		  , Foo
		  , Bar  (
			, C
			, D
		  )
			-- * Functions
		  , mkFoo
		  ) where 

> 4. **Trailing AND Leading Commas**: Allow both Trailing (2) AND Leading (3) Commas simultaneously in a single structure. ::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. **Trailing AND Leading Commas**: Allow both trailing (2) **and** leading (3) commas simultaneously in a single structure. ::
```

      data Example a = ....
                 deriving (
                        , Functor
                        , Foldable,
                          Applicative,
                          Traversable,
                 )

Syntax
~~~~~~~~~~~~

> The formal grammar changes for ``UnOrderedExtraCommas`` for Trailing AND Leading Commas WITHOUT Repetetive Commas:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The formal grammar changes for ``UnorderedExtraCommas`` for trailing **and** leading commas **without** repetitive commas:
```

   
    impspec ::= ( [,] import1 , ... , importn [,] )         (n ≥ 0)       -- upd
        | hiding ( [,] import1 , ... , importn [,] )        (n ≥ 0)       -- upd

    import ::= qvar
        | qtycon[(..)| ( [,] cname_1, ... , cname_n [,] ) ]  (n >= 0)     -- upd
        | qtycls[(..)| ( [,] var_1, ... , var_n [,] ) ]      (n >= 0)     -- upd
        | ......

    deriving ::= deriving dclass
            | deriving (  
                 ( [,] dclass1 , ... , dclassn [,] )    -- upd
              )

    topdecl ::= type simpletype = type
        | default ( [,] type1 , ... , typen [,] )       -- upd
        | ......

    constr ::= con [!] atype1 ... [!] atypek                (arity con = k, k>=0)
        | (btype | ! atype) conop (btype | ! atype)                 (infix conop)
        | con { [,] fielddecl1 , ... , fielddecln [,] }            (records n>=0)     -- upd
        | ......

    aexp ::= qvar                                                        (variable)
        | ......
        | qcon { [,] fbind1 , ... , fbindn [,] }      (labeled construction, n ≥ 0)   -- upd
        | aexp_(qcon) { [,] fbind1 , ... , fbindn [,] }   (labeled update, n  ≥  1)   -- upd

> These changes allow extra commas in next unordered structures:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These changes allow extra commas in the following unordered structures:
```

- module export "lists"
- module export sub-"lists"
- module import lists
- module import sub-"lists"
- deriving clauses
- default clauses
- record-like occurrences (declarations, patterns, constructions)

> This proposal **does not include yet** using extra commas in next unordered structures:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This proposal **does not include yet** using extra commas in the following unordered structures:
```

- fixity "lists"

This proposal does not cover structures in which the order of the elements matters, 
such as lists, tuples, and constraint tuples.

Examples
--------
1. **Improved Diff Quality**:

>    Right adding or removing a thing often needs changing 2 lines of code

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Adding or removing an element often requires changing 2 lines of code
```

   .. code-block:: diff

     --- example.hs	2024-06-10 12:00:00 +0000
     +++ example.hs	2024-06-10 12:01:00 +0000
     @@ -2,5 +2,5 @@
         baz1,
         baz2,
     -   foo
     +   foo,
     +   bar
         ) where

>    insted of just 1 line

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   now we can do this in 1 line
```

   .. code-block:: diff

     --- example.hs	2024-06-10 12:00:00 +0000
     +++ example.hs	2024-06-10 12:01:00 +0000
     @@ -2,5 +2,5 @@
         baz1,
         baz2,
         foo,
     +   bar,
         ) where

2. **Simplicity of conditional meta-programming**

>    We could simplify conditional meta-programming:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   This proposal would simplify conditional meta-programming like this:
```

   ::

    module Foo (
      Foo(
    #ifdef TESTING
        , Foo
    #endif
    #if USE_PATTERN_SYNONYMS
        , Pat1
        , Pat2
    #endif
    )

3. **Use a different style of coding**
   ::

       -- style: comma after element
       module Foo
          ( -- * Types
            Foo,
            Bar (
                   C, 
                   D,
                 ),
            Baz,
            -- * Functions
            mkFoo,
            mkBar,
            mkBaz,
          ) where 

       -- style: comma before element
       module Foo
          ( -- * Types
            , Foo
            , Bar (
                  , C
                  , D
                  )
            , Baz
            -- * Functions
            , mkFoo
            , mkBar
            , mkBaz
          ) where 

Effect and Interactions
-----------------------

> None.

Reviewer: I could imagine mentioning here, that this proposal purposefully dodges interacting with tuple sections.

Author: Good point!
I added it.

Costs and Drawbacks
-------------------

> We expect the implementation and maintenance costs of ``UnorderedExtraCommas`` has medium difficulty.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We expect the implementation and maintenance costs of ``UnorderedExtraCommas`` to have medium difficulty.
```

Second, all tooling which parses Haskell code will need to be updated to be compatible with the extended syntax.

Backward Compatibility
---------------------------------

This change is backward compatible with existing Haskell code,
as it introduces new syntactical permissiveness without altering the existing valid syntax.

All current Haskell programs will remain valid and unchanged in their behavior.

Alternatives
------------

> The primary alternative is "status quo".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The primary alternative is the "status quo".
```

Alternative adding extra commas
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

1. The proposal suggests to allow Trailing **AND** Leading Commas, but Committee could choose instead

>    Trailing **OR** Leading Commas, a bit stricter version of extra commas.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. The proposal suggests to allow trailing and leading commas at the same time, but the committee could choose instead to only allow one of
   trailing or leading commas at the same time. This would be a bit stricter.
```

>    The main benefit of OR-version - Cabal already support such liberalisation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   The main benefit of the OR-version is that Cabal already supports this liberalisation.
```

>    The main disadvantage  of OR-version is disallowing to mix code-styles. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   The main disadvantage of the OR-version is disallowing the mixing of code-styles. 
```

>    Also stricter version has more complex parsing ::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Also, the stricter version needs more complex parsing:
```

      lead_OR_trail  ::= ( , subList ) | ( subList [,] )

      lead_AND_trail ::= [,] subList [,]

2. The proposal suggests to allow Extra Commas **WITHOUT** Repetetive Commas, but Committee could choose instead

>    Extra Commas **WITH** Repetetive Commas, a much more liberal version of extra commas.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. The proposal suggests to allow extra commas **WITHOUT** repetitive commas, but the committee could choose instead to allow
   extra commas **WITH** repetitive commas. This would be more lenient.
```

>    **Repetetive Commas**: Allow multiple commas instead of one in place-unordered clauses:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   **Repetitive Commas**: Allow multiple commas instead of one in enumeration clauses where order does not matter:
```

   - module export lists and sub-lists
   - module import lists and sub-lists
   - deriving and default clauses
   - record-like occurrences (declarations, patterns, constructions)

   ::
   
       module BarFoo
		  ( 
		  , -- Foo    -- temporary
		  , -- Bar    -- temporary
		  , BarFoo
		  ) where 

   The main disadvantage of WITH-version is allowing to write very "dirty" code. 
   Haskell is known as a language with "pretty looking code".

   The main benefit of WITH-version - the maximum liberalisation of using extra commas. 

>    Also more liberal version has almost the same parsing ::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   The main disadvantage of the WITH-version is allowing to write very "dirty" code. 
   Haskell is known as a language with "pretty looking code".

   The main benefit of the WITH-version is the maximum liberalisation of using extra commas. 
   Also, the more lenient version has almost the same parsing ::
```

     lead_AND_trail_WITHOUT_repeats ::=  [,] { elem_i , } elem_max [,] 

     lead_AND_trail_WITH_repeats    ::=  {,} { elem_i , {,} } elem_max {,} 

> 3. The proposal suggests to allow Extra Commas in **PURE** Code, but Committee could allow also Extra Commas in **Pragmas**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. The proposal suggests to allow extra commas in code, but the committee could also allow extra commas in **pragmas**.
```

Unresolved Questions
--------------------

None.

Implementation Plan
-------------------

> It is unclear. I cannot implement this plan.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unclear. The author cannot implement this proposal.
```

        , Foo
    #endif
    #if USE_PATTERN_SYNONYMS
        , Pat1
        , Pat2
    #endif
    )

This feature provides several benefits:

1. **Improved Diff Quality**: When adding or removing items in a structure, having a trailing or leading comma means only
   the relevant lines are changed, reducing the noise in diffs and making reviews easier.
  
2. **Ease of Code Modification**: Developers can add new elements to the end / beginnging of a structure without having 
   to modify the previous last / first line, which reduces the likelihood of syntax errors.

3. **Consistency in Formatting**: When generating code automatically or formatting structures in a specific way, 
   leading and trailing commas can simplify the process.

4. **Use a different style of coding**: Extra commas allow for different styles to write code.

5. **Simplicity of conditional meta-programming**: Extra commas allow to write much simpler code when conditional meta-programming is used.

Proposed Change Specification
-----------------------------

This proposal introduces the following syntactical changes to Haskell.

Add a new language extension ``ExtraNonTupleCommas`` which allows both leading

> and trailing commas in **any** syntactic construct in which repetition with a comma is allowed, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and trailing commas in **any** syntactic construct in which enumeration with a comma as separator is allowed, 
```

**except** those that are delimited by round parentheses in terms or types (or constraints).

Note that (because of the exception) this proposal does not cover tuple-like structures

> (including tuples, constraint tuples, class context siplified and non-simplified), 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(including tuples, constraint tuples, class context simplified and non-simplified), 
```

delimited with round parentheses.  

> For example ``(,,3,4)`` is not covered by the is proposal - rather, it is a tuple section 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example ``(,,3,4)`` is not covered by this proposal - rather, it is a tuple section 
```

if extension ``-XTupleSections`` is on.

> More precisely, extension allows both leading and trailing commas 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
More precisely, this extension allows both leading and trailing commas 
```

> (but without repetitions commas) in the following structures:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(but not repeating commas) in the following structures:
```

- module export "lists" and sub-"lists"
- module import "lists" and sub-"lists"
- deriving clauses
- default clauses
- list-comprehensions 
- literal list (expressions and patterns)
- records in terms and types (declarations, patterns, constructions)
- multi-name function signatures (including nested fields in records)
- multi-name patten signatures
- multi-name type-synonym signatures
- fixity "lists"
- fundeps clauses
- guard clauses
- pragmas clauses

  - ``COMPLETE``
  - ``DEPRECATED``
  - ``INLINE``
  - ``NOINLINE``
  - ``LANGUAGE``
  - ``MINIMAL``
  - ``SPECIALIZE``
  - ``SPECIALIZE INLINE``
  - ``WARNING``

Syntax
~~~~~~~~~~~~

> The formal grammar changes for ``ExtraNonTupleCommas`` for trailing **and** leading commas **without** repetitive commas:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The formal grammar changes for ``ExtraNonTupleCommas`` for trailing **and** leading commas **without** adjacent commas:
```

I think repetitive is not the optimal word for this. I think "adjacent" works well or "repeated" if you prefer that.

> Trailing Commas in module export and import lists (but not in sub-lists) 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Trailing commas in module export and import lists (but not in sub-lists) 
```

    mingprgmdcl ::= '{-#' 'MINIMAL' mindef '#-}'

    mindef ::= [','] var1 ',' … ',' varn [',']                  ;-- upd
        |  [','] '(' mindef ')' [',']                           ;-- upd
        |  mindef '|' mindef

Examples
--------

1. **Improved Diff Quality**:

   Adding or removing an element often requires changing 2 lines of code

   .. code-block:: diff

     --- example.hs	2024-06-10 12:00:00 +0000
     +++ example.hs	2024-06-10 12:01:00 +0000
     @@ -2,5 +2,5 @@
         baz1,
         baz2,
     -   foo
     +   foo,
     +   bar
         ) where

   now we can do this in 1 line

   .. code-block:: diff

     --- example.hs	2024-06-10 12:00:00 +0000
     +++ example.hs	2024-06-10 12:01:00 +0000
     @@ -2,5 +2,5 @@
         baz1,
         baz2,
         foo,
     +   bar,
         ) where

2. **Simplicity of conditional meta-programming**

   This proposal would simplify conditional meta-programming like this:
   ::

    module Foo (
      Foo(
    #ifdef TESTING
        , Foo
    #endif
    #if USE_PATTERN_SYNONYMS
        , Pat1
        , Pat2
    #endif
    )

3. **Use a different style of coding**

>    With a leading comma, the Standard style for formatting a line with a comma before and a single element per line could be improved:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   With a leading comma, a standard style for formatting a line with a comma before and a single element per line can be improved:
```

   ::

       -- style: comma before element
       module Foo
          ( -- * Types
            , Foo
            , Bar (
                  , C
                  , D
                  )
            , Baz
            -- * Functions
            , mkFoo
            , mkBar
            , mkBaz
          ) where 

>    With a trailing comma, the alternative style for formatting a line with a comma after and a single element per line could be used:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   With a trailing comma, an alternative style for formatting a line with a comma after and a single element per line can be used:
```

     {-# INLINE foo1, 
                bar, 
                baz, 
     #-}

5. Different structures:
   ::
   			
       data family URec a p

       data instance URec (Ptr ()) p = UAddr   { uAddr#   :: Addr#,   }

       data instance URec Char     p = UChar   { uChar#   :: Char#,   uInt# :: Int#, }

       data instance URec Double   p = UDouble { , uDouble# :: Double#, uInt#, :: Int#,  uFloat#  :: Float#, }

       infixr 5 (+), (-),

       class C a b | a -> b, b -> a,  where ....

       foo x y |  p x, q y, = expr

       ,f, g, h, :: Int -> Int

       type , Foo, Bar, Baz, :: Int -> Int

       pattern , pat1, pat2, :: Int -> Int

       default (
                 Int,
                 String,
               )

Effect and Interactions
-----------------------

Tuple Sections
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This proposal purposefully dodges interacting with ``TupleSections`` extension.
With ``TupleSection`` it is impossible to distinguish syntexically section ``(, a)`` from extra comma ``(, a)``.

That's why this proposal do not cover tuples, unboxed tuples, constraint tuples, class context siplified and non-simplified.

Standalone Type Signatures
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> We allow to use extra commas in multi-name type-synonym signatures with ``StandaloneTypeSignatures`` extension.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We allow to use extra commas in multi-name type-synonym signatures with the ``StandaloneTypeSignatures`` extension.
```

Pattern Synonyms
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> We allow to use extra commas in multi-name patten signatures with ``PatternSynonyms`` extension.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We allow to use extra commas in multi-name pattern signatures with ``PatternSynonyms`` extension.
```

CPP
~~~

> This proposal does not affects directly ``CPP`` extension. But it affects grammar syntax of pragmas since specific version of CHC.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This proposal does not directly affect the ``CPP`` extension. But, it affects grammar syntax of pragmas since specific version of GHC.
```
I don’t understand what the last sentence here means.

Author: I wish to say, that if it is needed to write a code compatible with and without ability to use extra commas, you must write more conditions with CPP

Reviewer 2: So perhaps: "This proposal does not directly affect the ``CPP`` extension, but it allows you to write fewer conditional CPP directives in code involving comma separated lists. See the example in the motivation."

Author: Thanks! Done!

All current Haskell programs will remain valid and unchanged in their behavior.

Alternatives
------------

The primary alternative is the "status quo".

History
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Adding trailing commas (and more rarely leading commas) is a frequently asked for feature to add to Haskell.

But, this task is highly divisive in the Haskell community.

The original proposal #87 
`ExtraCommas (was: Trailing and leading commas in sub-export lists) <https://github.com/ghc-proposals/ghc-proposals/pull/87>`__ 
was discussed several years. The discussion was so controversial
that the author withdrew the proposal just before the final acceptance (with minor changes).

However, the tension in the Haskell community was so high that a new attempt of that proposal has not been proposed in the following 6 years.

This proposal is an attempt to allow extra commas where everyone agrees to have them - 
in all unordered structures (records, import and export "lists" and sublists, derivation and default clauses, multi-name signatures).

Alternative rules for adding extra commas
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> 1. The main non-controversial alternative of **NonTuple** Extra Commas is **Unordered** Extra Commas (allowing extra commas in ordered structures)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. The main non-controversial alternative of **NonTuple** Extra Commas is **Unordered** Extra Commas (allowing extra commas in unordered structures)
```

   and **NonData** Extra Commas (allowing extra commas in non-data structures), which is in the same places as "Unordered" without records.
  
   Other alternatives includes **Im(Ex)port** Extra Commas and **Everywhere** Extra Commas.

2. The proposal suggests to allow trailing and leading commas at the same time, but the committee could choose instead to only allow one of
   trailing or leading commas at the same time. This would be a bit stricter.

   The main benefit of the OR-version is that Cabal already supports this liberalisation.

   The main disadvantage of the OR-version is disallowing the mixing of code-styles. 
   Also, the stricter version needs more complex parsing: ::

      lead_OR_trail  ::= ( ',' subList ) | ( subList [','] )

      lead_AND_trail ::= [','] subList [',']

3. The proposal suggests to allow extra commas **WITHOUT** repetitive commas, but the committee could choose instead to allow
   extra commas **WITH** repetitive commas. This would be more lenient.

>    **Repetitive Commas**: Allow multiple commas instead of one in enumeration clauses where order does not matter:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. The proposal suggests to allow extra commas **WITHOUT** adjacent commas, but the committee could choose instead to allow
   extra commas **WITH** adjacent commas. This would be more lenient.

   **Adjacent Commas**: Allow multiple commas instead of one in enumeration clauses where order does not matter:
```

   - module export lists and sub-lists
   - module import lists and sub-lists
   - deriving and default clauses
   - record-like occurrences (declarations, patterns, constructions)

   ::
   
       module BarFoo
		  ( 
		  , -- Foo    -- temporary
		  , -- Bar    -- temporary
		  , BarFoo
		  ) where 

   The main disadvantage of the WITH-version is allowing to write very "dirty" code. 
   Haskell is known as a language with "pretty looking code".

   The main benefit of the WITH-version is the maximum liberalisation of using extra commas. 
   Also, the more lenient version has almost the same parsing ::

     lead_AND_trail_WITHOUT_repeats ::=  [','] { elem_i ',' } elem_max [','] 

     lead_AND_trail_WITH_repeats    ::=  {','} { elem_i ',' {','} } elem_max {','} 

> 4. The proposal suggests to allow extra commas in code, but the committee could also allow or disallow extra commas in **pragmas**.

Reviewer: Alternatives 3 and 4 don’t seem consistent with the proposal in its current form. Which is not really relevant, since I think we have consensus already. If you want to fix it I would drop 4 and for 3 it seems to make more sense to talk about "all the enumerations clauses listed above" instead of giving a different list.

Author: I droped (4) and simplified (3).

> Which is not really relevant, since I think we have consensus already.

That's why I moved it to alternatives from "Changes to Specification".

    module Foo (
      Foo(
    #ifdef TESTING
        , Foo
    #endif
    #if USE_PATTERN_SYNONYMS
        , Pat1
        , Pat2
    #endif
    )

This feature provides several benefits:

1. **Improved Diff Quality**: When adding or removing items in a structure, having a trailing or leading comma means only
   the relevant lines are changed, reducing the noise in diffs and making reviews easier.
  
2. **Ease of Code Modification**: Developers can add new elements to the end / beginnging of a structure without having 
   to modify the previous last / first line, which reduces the likelihood of syntax errors.

3. **Consistency in Formatting**: When generating code automatically or formatting structures in a specific way, 
   leading and trailing commas can simplify the process.

4. **Use a different style of coding**: Extra commas allow for different styles to write code.

5. **Simplicity of conditional meta-programming**: Extra commas allow to write much simpler code when conditional meta-programming is used.

Proposed Change Specification
-----------------------------

This proposal introduces the following syntactical changes to Haskell:

> 1. **New extension**: Add a new language extension ``ExtraNonTupleCommas`` which allows leading and trailing commas in code.

Reviewer 3: Please can it be more like this:
```
Add a new language extension ``ExtraNonTupleCommas`` which allows both leading
 and trailing commas in **any** syntactic construct in which repetition with a comma
is allowed, **except** those that are delimited by round parentheses in terms or
types (or constraints).

More precisely, allow both leading and trailing commas in the following structures
- module export "lists"
- module export sub-"lists"
- module import lists
- module import sub-"lists"
- deriving clauses
- default clauses
- list-comprehensions and literal list (expressions and patterns)
- records in terms and types (declarations, patterns, constructions)
- multi-name function signatures (including nested fields in records)
- multi-name patten signatures
- multi-name type-synonym signatures
- fixity "lists"
- fundeps clauses
- guard clauses
- pragmas clauses

  - ``COMPLETE``
  - ``DEPRECATED``
  - ``INLINE``
  - ``NOINLINE``
  - ``LANGUAGE``
  - ``MINIMAL``
  - ``SPECIALIZE``
  - ``SPECIALIZE INLINE``
  - ``WARNING``

See Section 3 Examples for examples of usage.

Note that (because of the exception) this proposal does not cover tuple-like structures
(including tuples, constraint tuples and s-context), delimited with round parentheses.  
For example `(,,3,4)` is not covered by the is proposal -- rather, it is a tuple section 
if `-XTupleSections` is on.

```

I think that subsumes the whole section down to 2.1

The examples can move to Section 3

Author: Done!

    lanexts     ::= [','] lext1 ',' … ',' lextn [',']    (n ≥ 1)  ;-- upd

    cmplprgmdcl ::= '{-#' 'COMPLETE' cmplpats '#-}'

    cmplpats    ::= [','] pat1 ',' … ',' patn [',']      (n ≥ 1)  ;-- upd

    mingprgmdcl ::= '{-#' 'MINIMAL' mindef '#-}'

    mindef ::= [','] var1 ',' … ',' varn [',']      ;-- upd
        |  [','] '(' mindef ')' [',']               ;-- upd
        |  mindef '|' mindef

These changes allow extra commas in the all unordered structures:

- module export "lists"
- module export sub-"lists"
- module import lists
- module import sub-"lists"
- deriving clauses
- default clauses
- list-comprehensions and literal list (expressions and patterns)
- records in terms and types (declarations, patterns, constructions)
- multi-name function signatures (including nested fields in records)
- multi-name patten signatures
- multi-name type-synonym signatures
- fixity "lists"
- fundeps clauses
- guard clauses
- pragmas clauses

  - ``COMPLETE``
  - ``DEPRECATED``
  - ``INLINE``
  - ``NOINLINE``
  - ``LANGUAGE``
  - ``MINIMAL``
  - ``SPECIALIZE``
  - ``SPECIALIZE INLINE``
  - ``WARNING``

This proposal does not cover tuple-like structures, 

> such as tuples, unboxed tuples, constraint tuples and s-context.

Reviewer 3: What is an s-context?

Reviewer 2: The context of an instance or class in the Haskell 2010 report:

```
| class [scontext =>] tycls tyvar [where cdecls]
| instance [scontext =>] qtycls inst [where idecls] 
```

Reviewer 3: > The context of an instance or class in the Haskell 2010 report:

Great.  Can the text say so, @vitww?  Thanks

Author: Technically by "**s-content**" I mean **both**:
-  `class [scontext =>]` (_simplified_ class content) 
- `data [context =>]` (_non-simplified_ class content)
